Upload (#1)
privacy-ethereum/nova-by-hand: part_1.md

# Nova Folding Introduction Part 1

As stated in the opening line of Nova paper, Nova is a new approach to realize Incrementally Verifiable Computation (IVC). So let’s begin to understand the IVC. 

# 1 Incremental Verifiable Computation

## 1.1 Incremental Computation

> ![incremenatl computation](./images/part1_incrementalcomputation.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![incremental computation](./images/part1_incrementalcomputation.png)
```

First, let's define the Incremental Computation. It involves breaking down a large, complex computation into smaller, manageable steps. In this approach, a fixed function $F$ is applied iteratively to an initial state $Z_0$, along with a sequence of inputs $ω_1, ω_2,..., ω_n$. This process results in a series of intermediate states $Z_1, Z_2, ...Z_i$, ultimately leading to the final state $Z_n$. The main advantage of incremental computation is its ability to handle complex calculations in a step-wise manner, making it easier to manage and update computations based on new inputs or changes.

## 1.2 Incremental Verifiable Computation (IVC)

> ![incremenatl verifiable computation](./images/part1_incrementalverifiablecomputation.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![incremental verifiable computation](./images/part1_incrementalverifiablecomputation.png)
```

What happens when verifiability is added to Incremental Computation? Incremental Verifiable Computation (IVC) combines incremental computation with a verification layer. It's not just computing states $Z_i$, but also generating a proof $\Pi_i$ for each step $i$. This proof ensures that every computation step is accurate.

In IVC, the system verifies the transition from a previous state $Z_{i-1}$ to the current state $Z_i$ using a function $F$ and input $ω_i$. Crucially, it utilizes the proof $\Pi_i$ generated for each step $i$ to verify this transition. These proofs form a chain, allowing for the verification that the final state $Z_n$ results from a correctly executed series of computations with the proof $\Pi_n$. 

## 1.3 Constructing IVC Proofs
Here, we explore the essential components that make this verification possible.
![constructing ivc proof](./images/part1_constructingivcproof.png)

### 1.3.1 Proof of Correctness

> At the heart of IVC lies the Proof of Correctness. For each step, denoted by $i$, the system generates a proof $\Pi_i$ alongside the computational state $Z_i$. This proof confirmes that the transition from the previous state $Z_{i-1}$ to the current state $Z_i$, through the application of function $F$ with input $\omega_i$, is executed correctly. Specifically, $\Pi_i$ demonstrates that $F(Z_{i-1}, \omega_i)$ precisely results in $Z_i$, effectively assuring the accuracy of this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the heart of IVC lies the Proof of Correctness. For each step, denoted by $i$, the system generates a proof $\Pi_i$ alongside the computational state $Z_i$. This proof ensures that the transition from the previous state $Z_{i-1}$ to the current state $Z_i$, through the application of function $F$ with input $\omega_i$, has been executed correctly. Specifically, $\Pi_i$ demonstrates that $F(Z_{i-1}, \omega_i)$ results in $Z_i$.
```

### 1.3.2 Chain of Verification

> The Chain of Verification extends the concept of trust throughout the computation sequence. Each proof $\Pi_i$ ensure the accuracy of the computation from the previous state, thereby creating a trust chain that links back to the initial state $Z_0$. This is articulated as $V(vp, (i - 1, Z_0, Z_{i-1}), \Pi_{i-1}) = \text{T/F}$, signifying the seamless verification of each step in the computation process.

Reviewer: I'm not sure to understand what you mean by "the concept of trust"? Is there some mathematical definition of it? Or some reference you are thinking of?

Author: I changed the first sentence to
In IVC, the correctness of each step forms a sequential chain.

Author: @dmpierre 
Thanks for all the comments! Could you please again check the unresolved ones that I have changed some of the text?

> The Chain of Verification extends the concept of trust throughout the computation sequence. Each proof $\Pi_i$ ensure the accuracy of the computation from the previous state, thereby creating a trust chain that links back to the initial state $Z_0$. This is articulated as $V(vp, (i - 1, Z_0, Z_{i-1}), \Pi_{i-1}) = \text{T/F}$, signifying the seamless verification of each step in the computation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chain of Verification extends the concept of trust throughout the computation sequence. Each proof $\Pi_i$ ensure the accuracy of the computation from the previous state, thereby creating a trust chain that links back to the initial state $Z_0$. This is articulated as $V(vp, (i - 1, Z_0, Z_{i-1}), \Pi_{i-1}) = \{0, 1\}$, signifying the seamless verification of each step in the computation process.
```

> The Chain of Verification extends the concept of trust throughout the computation sequence. Each proof $\Pi_i$ ensure the accuracy of the computation from the previous state, thereby creating a trust chain that links back to the initial state $Z_0$. This is articulated as $V(vp, (i - 1, Z_0, Z_{i-1}), \Pi_{i-1}) = \text{T/F}$, signifying the seamless verification of each step in the computation process.

Reviewer: Could you state what $V$ (which you do, but below) and $vp$ are?

### 1.3.3 The Final Proof $\Pi_n$

> Culminating the series of verifications is The Final Proof $\Pi_n$, which underscores the correctness of the entire computational sequence. This proof validates that all inputs $\omega_1$ to $\omega_n$ have been accurately processed, leading to the final state $Z_n$. The elegance of $\Pi_n$ lies in its ability to facilitate efficient verification of the entire process without the need to individually recompute each step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Culminating the series of verifications is the final proof $\Pi_n$, which validates that all inputs $\omega_1$ to $\omega_n$ have been accurately processed, leading to the final state $Z_n$. The elegance of $\Pi_n$ lies in its ability to facilitate efficient verification of the entire process without the need to individually recompute each step.
```

# 2 Mechanisms and problems of ordinary Recursion
Now that you understand IVC, let's review the recursive proofs in zero-knowledge proofs.

## 2.1 Two level SNARK recursion 

> ![two level snark recursion](./images/part1_twolevelsnarkrecursion.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![two levels snark recursion](./images/part1_twolevelsnarkrecursion.png)
```

> This is the diagram of recursion, two-level SNARK which consists the Inner Proof System and the Outer Proof System. For example, suppose we want to use a fast proof scheme for $P1$ and a proof scheme whose verification is the EVM friendly in $P2$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the diagram of a recursive two-levels SNARK which consists in an inner and an outer proof system. For example, suppose we want to combine a fast $P_1$ proof scheme with another EVM friendly $P_2$ proof scheme.
```

**Inner Proof System:**
- Public input: $x$
- Witness: $w$
At this level, the SNARK prover $P_1$ is tasked with demonstrating knowledge of a witness $w$ that satisfies the computation $C(x, w) = 0$ and generates an initial proof $\Pi_1$.

**Outer Proof System:**
- Public input: Verifying parameters $vp$ and $x$
- Witness: $\Pi_1$

> In the outer layer, a different SNARK prover $P_2$ proves the existence of a valid proof $\Pi_1$ from the Inner Proof System. This is done by showing that the verifier $V$, equipped with parameters $vp$, confirms the legitimacy of $x$ and $\Pi_1$ by outputting "yes." and then creates a new proof $\Pi_2$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the outer layer, a different SNARK prover $P_2$ proves the existence of a valid proof $\Pi_1$ from the Inner Proof System. This is done by showing that the verifier $V$, equipped with parameters $vp$, confirms the legitimacy of $x$ and $\Pi_1$ by outputting $1$ and creating a new proof $\Pi_2$.
```

The process effectively demonstrates not only the validity of the initial computation $C(x, w)$ but also the verifier's acknowledgment of this validity through the second-level proof $\Pi_2$.

This is the concept of the recursion, unlike IVC, which is characterized by its step-wise computation and verification process. So next, let's think about SNARK-based IVC naively.

## 2.2 Naive SNARK-Based IVC
![naive snark-based ivc](./images/part1_naivesnarkbasedivc.png)

> The diagram shows a Naive SNARK-Based IVC. At each step $i$, the IVC state $Z_i$ is transformed by a function $F$ to generate a new state $Z_{i+1}$. Simultaneously, a proof $\Pi_i$ is verified and, along with $Z_i$, by the SNARK verifier $SNARK.V$. This verification aims to ensure the correctness of previous state $Z_i$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagram shows a Naive SNARK-Based IVC. At each step $i$, the IVC state $Z_i$ is transformed by a function $F$ to generate a new state $Z_{i+1}$ and a proof $\Pi_i$ is verified by the SNARK verifier $SNARK.V$. This verification aims to ensure the correctness of the transition from the previous state $Z_i$ to the next $Z_{i+1}$.
```

There is an augmented circuit that integrates both $F$ and $SNARK.V$, where $SNARK.P$ is responsible for generating the next proof $\Pi_{i+1}$. This proof ensures the integrity of the new state $Z_{i+1}$.

In the final verification step, the SNARK verifier $SNARK.V$ uses the final state $Z_n$, the proof $\Pi_n$, and the verification key $vk$ to check the entire sequence's integrity.

**Problem of Naive SNARK-Based IVC**

> If the naive SNARK adopts a general pairing-based approach, this method significantly increases recursion overhead and prolongs the overall proving time. The reason is the internal Verifier's need to repetitively handle pairing and related processes at each step.

Reviewer: Could make a brief paragraph on what would this approach look like? 
Also, I think adding an explanation of what "recursion overhead" is could be worth it!

Author: Thank you. I changed them below.

**Problem of Naive SNARK-Based IVC**

If the naive SNARK adopts a general pairing-based approach, this method significantly increases recursion overhead and extends the overall proving time. In a pairing-based approach, the internal verifier $SNARK.V$ uses pairing to validate each proof which is costly. Here, if the time in $SNARK.V$ is longer than the execution of circuit R, the time in $SNARK.P$ will increase with each step. And it is time-consuming to create a SNARK proof at each step.

**Recursion overhead**

The recursion overhead refers to the additional steps required that the prover must prove in addition to proving the function $F$.

[zkPairing](https://0xparc.org/blog/zk-pairing-1) and [circom-pairing](https://github.com/yi-sun/circom-pairing) are the works done by the 0xParc, describing an experimental implementation and benchmarking for verifying pairings in Circom circuit.

| Metric                 | Optimal Ate Pairing |
|------------------------|---------------------------|
| Constraints            | 11.4M                     |
| Compilation Time       | 1.9 hrs                   |
| Witness Generation Time| 1 min                     |
| Proving Key Size       | 6.5 GB                    |
| Proof Generation Time  | 52 sec                    |
| Proof Verification Time| 1 sec                     |

> From their benchmarks, for example, the Optimal Ate pairing metric cites a Proving time of 52 seconds and a Proof verification time of 1 second. From the perspective of Naive SNARK-Based IVC, this implies that each step will take at least 52 seconds for Proving time and 1 second for Proof verification time. As the number of IVC steps increases to 100 or even 1000, this would lead to substantial time consumption and overhead. Therefore, this approach may not be the most efficient for implementing IVC.

Reviewer: I think it could make sense to mention or even write a link [to the benchmarks](https://github.com/yi-sun/circom-pairing?tab=readme-ov-file#benchmarks) directly, instead of repeating them. Otherwise, could you add the machine on which those running times are obtained?

Author: I changed it to link to the benchmark sheet.

## 2.3 FRI family
So the next topic is what would be the outcome of adopting FRI commitments instead of  polynomial commitments and pairings in ZKP schemes? Such schemes, utilizing FRI commitments, are known as zkSTARKs or the FRI-Family. zkSTARKs are known for their lack of a trusted setup requirement and their quantum resistance, a characteristic owing to the use of hash functions in Merkle tree commitments.

> Another feature is the ease of recursive proofs. For instance, in Plonky2, despite the heavy computational demand due to Merkle Proofs constructed with hash functions, Plonk's custom gates enable the streamlined execution of recursive proofs in poly-log.

Reviewer: Maybe a link to a repo or a writeup could be interesting for people that want to dive in this topic?

Author: I added the article link of Introducing Plonky2 from polygon in the reference section.

Individual proofs are independent, making them suitable for parallelization. Some zkVM projects prefer it for its fast recursive proofs and ease of parallelization.

> However, a disadvantage is the expansion in Proof Size attributed to FRI's Merkle Proofs. This enlargement escalates the call data and consequently raising the gas cost for verification on Ethereum, reputedly four times that of Groth16.

Reviewer: I might be mistaken but I think estimating the gas costs is a bit more involved, as it also depends on the security parameters chosen. I don't have the details in mind though..

Author: I did some research, but could not figure it out and deleted that sentence to avoid ambiguity, leaving only this sentence.
However, a disadvantage is the expansion in proof size attributed to FRI's Merkle Proofs.

The augmented circuit integrates both $F$ and $ACC.V$ to ensure the correctness of these operations. The SNARK prover $SNARK.P$ generates a proof $\Pi_{i+1}$, demonstrating that the inputs and outputs satisfy the augmented circuit, signifying a valid transition from $Z_i$ to $Z_{i+1}$ and the corresponding accumulator state transition.

The final process involves the SNARK verifier $SNARK.V$ executing the final verification using the final state $Z_n$, proof $\Pi_n$, and the accumulator $\Pi_{acc,n}$. Additionally, the Decider algorithm $Decider$ is applied to the final accumulator $\Pi_{acc,n}$, affirming the validity of all preceding proofs if successful.

Accumulation compress two SNARK proofs, such as the Inner Product Argument (IPA), into one effectively. This method reduces the need for pairing at each step, thereby enhancing the efficiency of the overall verification process.

While the accumulation approach in Halo2, which compresses commitments like the Inner Product Argument (IPA) into a single one, effectively addresses some inefficiencies, it still necessitates generating SNARK proofs at each IVC step. 

# 3 Nova Folding

> ## 3.1 Features of Nova Folding

Reviewer: I think this part could serve as a "light" transition to `part 2`? It is a tad too complex right now, some terms are introduced without being defined, making the diagram hard to read since it has a lot of moving parts.

Author: I added an emphatic sentence.

A detailed explanation will be given in part 2, so this is what you should remember now as the characteristics of the Folding Scheme.

![nova folding](./images/part1_novafolding2.png)

> Unlike the traditional accumulation method, Folding scheme can fold the two arithmetization and it's instances before the commitment into one. In Nova, it can fold the two R1CS instances into one.

Reviewer: I think it could make sense to dive into the details later on? This might be confusing since you are writing about commitments and folding instances together, when you have not detailed anything about Nova for now.

Author: I changed the sentence below

In this picture, $u$ and $w$ represent instance and witness pair for the R1CS. This breakthrough implies that, within the IVC steps, there's no longer a need to generate each SNARK proof and verify it for each step, or to generate and verify commitments in each step, except for the final one.  This advancement makes it more efficient IVC implementations.
